WhatNow?
========

by Garry Lancaster
v1.11 - 17th July 2001

WhatNow? is an application that can load and play many freely-available 
text-only and text/graphic adventures on your Z88. It is a complete 
emulation of Incentive's Graphic Adventure Creator (or GAC) runtime 
system.

Using this application you can play many adventure games that were 
released in the eighties for the Sinclair ZX Spectrum; titles such as 
Book Of The Dead, Frankenstein, Karyssia - Queen Of Diamonds and more.

Additionally, if you feel so inclined, you can use your own Speccy (or 
one of the many emulators) to create your own adventures with GAC so 
that they can be enjoyed by Z88 users. If there is any interest in 
doing this, I might even consider adding an adventure compilation 
feature to WhatNow?, so get writing!

New in the latest release (v1.11) is full support for all GAC adventures
produced for the Amstrad CPC range of computers, the ability to continue
typing and playing the adventure while pictures are still being drawn, and
a bugfix.


Loading GACed adventures
========================
The standard Z88 menu system is used throughout WhatNow?. When you 
first enter the system, or when you close an adventure file, you will 
arrive at the title screen. From here, you can use commands on the File 
menu. If you choose a command but change your mind, you can cancel by 
pressing ESCape in the dialog box that appears.

Load file
---------
This command allows you to select a GAC datafile (either by selecting 
from the Filer or simply typing the name) to load and play. Some 
datafiles can be obtained from the Z88 forever! website. If you write 
your own adventure on the Spectrum, using the "save datafile" option 
will produce a file suitable for WhatNow?

The system will take a few moments to load the file and ensure that it 
is a valid GAC datafile. After that, you will enter the game.

Close file
----------
When used from within a game, this command returns you to the main 
title screen, where you can choose to load another adventure. 

Quit
----
Terminates the application.

Extract file
------------
If you obtain Spectrum snapshots or tape images from the internet or a 
CD-ROM, you can use this option to attempt to extract any GAC datafiles 
within them. This works with most snapshot and tape images, the most 
common being TAP, TZX and SNA. If in doubt, try using the option 
anyway; the worst that can happen is that no game will be found!

During the extraction process, only a cursory inspection of the data is 
made, so it's possible that datafiles that don't work will be produced 
(the load file option makes a thorough check of the data and will 
refuse to run an invalid game).

Some GAC games were saved on tape as a number of separate blocks rather 
than as a single chunk, and these will not in general be extracted 
properly (for example, Frankenstein). If you run into this problem, you 
will have to load the game into a Spectrum emulator and take a 
snapshot; datafiles can then be extracted from the snapshots.

The extract command continues searching a file even after successfully 
extracting a datafile, so if you give it a TAP or TZX file containing a 
multi-part adventure, all parts will be extracted. The first part is 
always given the .gac extension, with other parts being called .ga2, 
.ga3 and so on.

At the moment, there is no way to extract files from the popular Z80 
snapshot format. To get around this, you will have to convert these 
snapshots to the SNA format (or similar) using an emulator or other 
conversion utility.

Version 1.11 now includes full support for Amstrad CPC games. The 
extract option is capable of producing datafiles from snapshots or 
uncompressed tape images of these games, but disk files (.dsk) are not 
supported.


The Parser
==========
WhatNow? provides a complex parser which can understand a variety of 
sentences. Rather than entering single commands, you can enter many in 
one go, separating them with "and", "then" or punctuation. The system 
also understands the use of the word "it" to refer to the last object 
mentioned. For example, you could enter:

Get the lamp, light it and go east. Go south then get the rat.

Finally, you can abbrieviate words as much as you like, and the parser 
will do its best to understand what you mean.


Graphics
========
Within the limits of the Z88 display, pictures are displayed as 
accurately as possible. However, since the height of the display is 
only half that used on the Spectrum, some distortion is unavoidable.

Spectrum colours are given different shading patterns when used to fill 
areas. However, due to the Spectrum's unusual display arrangement, 
which is effectively a two-colour display overlaid with colour 
information, some pictures may look slightly odd if the designer has 
tried to be clever in the use of ink and paper colours. This is 
particularly noticeable in the example adventure, Ransom.

Graphics from Amstrad CPC games can look even more peculiar, due to the 
four-colour system used which cannot be easily reproduced on the Z88.


User-defined graphics (UDGs)
============================
Although GAC did not provide any way of using the Spectrum's 
user-defined graphics facility, many games included an alternate 
character set (for a more pleasing typeface), and some of these used a 
few of the symbol characters as user-defined graphics.

Due to differences between Z88 and Spectrum character definitions, it 
is not possible to automatically extract any of these UDGs from 
snapshot files. However, special .udg files are now available for some 
games, and these add the graphic characters found in the Spectrum 
versions to the Z88.

To allow UDGs to be displayed, you must keep the .udg files together 
with the adventure datafile, and they must have the same name. For 
example, if you have botd1.gac and botd1.udg in the same location the 
UDGs will be automatically installed when you load the adventure.


Game commands
=============
During gameplay, there are a few commands on the Game menu that you can 
use.

Load position
-------------
Allows you to load a previously saved position. Most adventures also 
allow you to type "load" to perform the same function.

Save position
-------------
Similarly, lets you save your current position to a file. You can 
usually type "save" to do this as well.

Restart
-------
Restarts the adventure. Well, what did you expect? ;-)


Options
=======
A number of options are available to affect the way the system behaves. 
These can be selected at any time, whether playing a game or not.

Graphics on
-----------
Splits the display into a text window at the left, and a graphics 
window at the right. In most adventures, you can also type "pictures" 
for the same effect. You can select this even if the adventure is 
text-only, if you prefer a narrow text window.

Text only
---------
Devotes the entire width of the display to text. This can also usually 
be selected from within an adventure with the "text" command.

Pause mode
----------
If a large amount of text is being displayed, having this option on (it 
is on by default) means that the system will pause to let you read the 
text before scrolling it off the screen.

Scroll mode
-----------
If you prefer, you can select scroll mode which lets text scroll 
through the screen without any pauses.

Trap errors
-----------
This option, set by default, means that WhatNow? will stop the game 
with a report if an error in the GAC game file is encountered.

Ignore errors
-------------
If you find a particular game has errors in it (eg Matt Lucas often 
causes a "stack imbalance" error), you can use this option to simply 
ignore them and allow you to continue playing.


Errors and bug reports
======================
Please contact me via the Z88 Forever website if you should encounter a 
bug in the system, or find any Spectrum or Amstrad GAC adventure that
can't be extracted or played. I'd also like to hear if you discover a
particular game with errors in it. If possible, please include a saved game 
position just before the error occurs, and let me know full details of 
what you did when the problem appeared.


Credits
=======
Incentive for designing such an excellent utility
All GAC adventure writers, especially the prolific Charles A Sharp
Paul White for much valuable testing, and providing GAC downloads
Dominic Morris for more testing, and the wonderful "Oh Sh@#!"
Paul David Doherty for researching available GAC adventures


History
=======
v1.11	Minor speed improvements

v1.10	Fixed punctuation bug in parser

v1.09	Added full support for all Amstrad CPC games

v1.08	Graphics now drawn as separate task, allowing play
	to continue at the same time

v1.07	Allow extraction of games larger than can be played

v1.06	Converted source to run with Z88 CamelForth v3.04

v1.05	Added limited support for Amstrad CPC games

v1.04	Added user-defined graphics capability
	Fixed the deliberate mistake in v1.03 ;-)

v1.03	Added error trapping/ignore options
	Pictures no longer redrawn if unnecessary
	Bugfix: if local conditions were satisfied, "I don't 
	understand" errors could still be displayed (Matt Lucas)
	Fixed a nasty bug introduced in v1.02 (oops!) 
	which caused WhatNow? to hang if a game error was 
	encountered

v1.02	All possible memory now given back to the system on 
	pre-emption
	Bugfix: end of conditions not always properly detected 
	(Book Of The Dead)
	Bugfix: extra "Okay" messages after a GET/DROP/BRIN/FIND 
	action failed (Oh Sh@#!)

v1.01	Bugfix: ellipses of zero height hung the system 
	(Deadenders, Spacestation Beta 1)
	Bugfix: turn count should be incremented after high 
	priority conditions and not as in GAC manual (Oh Sh@#!)
	Bugfix in output buffering routines (Wiz-Biz)
	Minor optimization in output buffering routines
	Bugfix: after pre-emption pictures were redrawn even if it 
	was "dark" (Ransom)
	Bugfix: effects of BRIN and FIND actions corrected

v1.00	Initial release

Garry Lancaster, 17th July 2001
